Adding the new backup guide (#5080)
hashicorp/consul: website/source/docs/guides/backup.html.md

---
layout: "docs"
page_title: "Cluster Backups"
sidebar_current: "docs-guides-backups"
description: |-
  Consul provide the snapshot tool for backing up and restoring data. In this guide you will learn how to use both.
---

# Cluster Backups

> Creating server backups is an important step in production deployments. Backups provide a mechanism for the server to recover from an outage (network loss, operator error, or a corrupted data directory). All agents write to the `-data-dir` before commit. This directory persists the local agent’s state and - in the case of servers -  it also holds the Raft information.

Reviewer: Backups are also incredibly important for upgrades since it's often impossible to downgrade in-place due to changes in the state store format and the only way back is to restore from a backup.

We don't need tons of detail on that here but just wanted to mention incase it's worth including briefly in that list?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating server backups is an important step in production deployments. Backups provide a mechanism for the server to recover from an outage (network loss, operator error, or a corrupted data directory). All servers write to the `-data-dir` before commit on write requests. The same directory is used on client agents to persist local state too, but this is not critical and can be rebuilt when recreating an agent. Local client state is not backed up in this guide and doesn't need to be in general, only the server's Raft store state.
```

> Consul provides the [snapshot](https://consul.io/docs/commands/snapshot.html) command which can be run using the CLI command or the API. The `snapshot` command saves the point-in-time snapshot of the state of the Consul servers which includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul provides the [snapshot](https://consul.io/docs/commands/snapshot.html) command which can be run using the CLI or the API. The `snapshot` command saves a point-in-time snapshot of the state of the Consul servers which includes:
```

* KV entries 
* the service catalog
* prepared queries
* sessions 

> * ACLs

Reviewer: This is not exhaustive and even if we made it so would get out of date, should we consider adding an element to the end of disclaimer that there is a bunch of other stuff too. For example: autopilot config, Connect CA config, intentions etc.

Author: @banks Can we identify the data that is most commonly saved? I am thinking we could have a smaller list of data that every environment is likely to have (KV entries, ACLs, service catalog). And then include a note that depending on the environment/configuration additional data will be saved (autopilot config, intentions, etc). Does that makes sense?

With [Consul Enterprise](/docs/commands/snapshot/agent.html), the `snapshot agent` command runs periodically and writes to local or remote storage (such as Amazon S3).

By default, all snapshots are taken using `consistent` mode where requests are forwarded to the leader which verifies that it is still in power before taking the snapshot. Snapshots will not be saved if the cluster is degraded or if no leader is available. To reduce the burden on the leader, it is possible to [run the snapshot](/docs/commands/snapshot/save.html) on any non-leader server using `stale` consistency mode.

This spreads the load across nodes at the possible expense of losing full consistency guarantees. Typically this means that a very small number of recent writes may not be included. The omitted writes are typically limited to data written in the last `100ms` or less from the recovery point. This is usually suitable for disaster recovery. However, the system can’t guarantee how stale this may be if executed against a partitioned server.

## Create Your First Backup

> The `snapshot save` command for backing up the cluster state has many configuration options. In a production environment, you will want to configure ACL tokens and client certificates for security. The configuration options also allow you to specify the datacenter and server to collect the backup data. Below are several examples. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `snapshot save` command for backing up the cluster state has many configuration options. In a production environment, you will want to configure ACL tokens and client certificates for security. The configuration options also allow you to specify the datacenter and server to collect the backup data from. Below are several examples. 
```

 
First, we will run the basic snapshot command with the all the defaults, including `consistent` mode.

```sh
$ consul snapshot save backup.snap
Saved and verified snapshot to index 1176
```
The backup will be saved locally in the directory where we ran the command. 

> You can view metadata about the backup with the `inspect` subcommand. 

Reviewer: TIL 😄

```sh
$ consul snapshot inspect backup.snap
ID           2-1182-1542056499724
Size         4115
Index        1182
Term         2
Version      1
```

To understand each field review the inspect [documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/commands/snapshot/inspect.html). Notably, the `Version` field does not correspond to the version of the data. Rather it is the snapshot format version. 

Next, let’s collect the cluster data from a non-leader by specifying stale mode.

```sh
$ consul snapshot save -stale backup.snap
Saved and verified snapshot to index 2276
```

Once ACLs and agent certificates are configured, they can be passed in with the following flags.

```sh

> $ consul snapshot save -stale -token=<ead6787-23thbd-666789> -ca-file=</path/to/file> backup.snap

Reviewer: Can we recommend using ENV for the token please? Including secrets in command arg is a big security risk and in this example where we are implicitly showing "how to do it in your secured production env" that is especially true. I think it should look like this (not tested though):

```suggestion
$ export CONSUL_HTTP_TOKEN="fc91b2b8-3631-4af4-8844-55b5c5e33235"
$ consul snapshot save -stale -ca-file=</path/to/file> backup.snap
```

You can set the ca file via ENV too if you want but that has no direct security concern.

Reviewer: As a small thought, the example token here isn't a valid UUID string as its the wrong format and contains non-hex chars `th`. I think for clarity we should either show tokens as place holder like `<your ACL token>` or an actual UUID to demonstrate the real format.

Author: I am happy to change it to an ENV. I tested on my ACL enabled cluster and it works! I will also update the token to say `< your ACL token>` to be consistent.

Saved and verified snapshot to index 2287
```

> Alternatively, you can use environment variables to say the ACL token and CA cert. 

Reviewer: Ha ha, I should have read down further. I'd still prefer not to show use of `-token` in guides as it's really not secure and only there for convenience where the security concern is not too large.

Author: Totally! I will update the command after testing tomorrow.

> For production use, the  `snapshot save` command or [API](https://www.consul.io/api/snapshot.html) should be scripted and run frequently. In addition to frequently backing up the cluster state, there are several use cases when you would also want to manually execute `snapshot save`. First, it should be best practice to backup the cluster before upgrading. If the upgrade does not go according to plan, this will ensure you have the latest data. Second, if the cluster loses quorum it may be beneficial to save the state before the non-leaders become divergent. Finally, you can manually snapshot the cluster for use of bootstrapping a new cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For production use, the  `snapshot save` command or [API](https://www.consul.io/api/snapshot.html) should be scripted and run frequently. In addition to frequently backing up the cluster state, there are several use cases when you would also want to manually execute `snapshot save`. First, you should always backup the cluster before upgrading. If the upgrade does not go according to plan it is often not possible to downgrade due to changes in the state store format. Restoring from a backup is the only option so taking one before the upgrade will ensure you have the latest data. Second, if the cluster loses quorum it may be beneficial to save the state before the servers become divergent. Finally, you can manually snapshot a cluster and use that to bootstrap a new cluster with the same state. 
```

Operationally, the backup process does not need to be executed on every server. Additionally, you can use the configuration options to save the backups to a mounted filesystem. The mounted filesystem can even be cloud storage, such as Amazon S3. The enterprise command `snapshot agent` automates this process.

## Restore from Backup 

> Running the `restore` process should be straightforward. However, there are a couple actions you can take to ensure the process goes smoothly. First, make sure the cluster you are restoring is stable. Second, you will only need to run the process once, on the leader. The cluster gossip protocol will ensure the data is propagated to the non-leaders.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the `restore` process should be straightforward. However, there are a couple of actions you can take to ensure the process goes smoothly. First, make sure the cluster you are restoring is stable and has a leader. You can see this using `consul operator raft list-peers` and checking server logs and telemetry for signs of leader elections or network issues. You will only need to run the process once, on the leader. The Raft consensus protocol ensures that all servers restore the same state.
```

Author: I like that you added the information about checking for a leader!

The basic restore command. 

```sh
$ consul snapshot restore backup.snap
Restored snapshot

> ```

Reviewer: Should we state _where_ this command is running? It needs to be run on a server otherwise the CONSUL_HTTP_ADDR or -http-addr options need to be specified.

Author: We do, but I will re-org to make it clearer.
